---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

*EarlyPrint* is a collaborative effort—centered doubly at Northwestern University and Washington University in St. Louis—to transform the early English print record, from 1473 to the early 1700s, into a linguistically annotated and deeply searchable text archive. Its leaders have been Joseph Loewenstein and Martin Mueller. Contributions to the project have been made by faculty, librarians, IT professionals, and students at Amherst, Northwestern, Notre Dame, Nebraska-Lincoln, Tübingen, and Washington University in St. Louis, notably Anupam Basu, Craig Berry, John Ladd, Philip Burns, Douglas Knox, Stephen Pentecost, Kate Needham, Elisabeth Chaghafi, Peter Berek, Tracy Bergstrom, Daniel Johnson, Eric Lease Morgan, Kate Needham, Hannah Bredar, Brian Pytlik Zillig, and Lydia Zoells.

## Team

## Additional Credits

Each text is derived from an EEBO-TCP transcription. Most of the texts
come from the TCP Phase 1 project. Proquest graciously gave permission
to add some three dozen plays from TCP Phase 2 to the *Shakespeare His
Contemporaries* Project, a pilot effort now subsumed within *EarlyPrint*.
All texts in this corpus are covered by a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/legalcode) . See
the [short
summary](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/deed.en_US) of
how the license affects your use of the texts.

The texts were converted from their original SGML format to at TEI P5
with [Abbot](https://github.com/CDRH/abbot), written by Brian
Pytlik-Zillig and Stephen Ramsay at the Center for Digital Research in
the Humanities at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

All of the texts underwent collaborative curation by undergraduates. At
Northwestern these included Nayoon Ahn, Hannah Bredar, Madeline Burg,
Nicole Sheriko, Melina Yeh, Sally Moore Hausken, Irina Huang, Yue Hu,
Ashley Guo, Anelia Kudin, and Katherine Elizabeth Poland. At Washington
University in St. Louis the curators were Kate Needham and Lydia Zoells,
who learned much about the editing of Early Modern texts in Joe
Loewenstein\'s Spenser Lab. These students used and were instrumental in
the design and refinement of the collaboration curation tools Annolex
and Library Finder (see below). Peter Berek at Amherst College directed
three students, Heejin \"Gabby\" Ro, Yixin \"Arthur\" Xiao, and Keren
Yi. Over a period of three weeks in January 2016 they corrected many
textual defects in 118 plays, consulting printed originals at Smith
College and the Houghton Library.

Craig Berry designed and built the correction tool
[Annolex](http://annolex.at.northwestern.edu). Annolex was a prototype
curation tool now superseded by the annotation features of *EarlyPrint*.

The texts were tokenized and linguistically annotated with
[MorphAdorner](http://morphadorner.northwestern.edu/morphadorner), a
Natural Language Processing toolkit developed by Philip R. Burns at
Northwestern University. Burns also developed the website for
*Shakespeare His Contemporaries* using the [TEI Simple PM
toolkit](https://github.com/wolfgangmm/tei-simple-pm) written by
Wolfgang Meier.

We are grateful to the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for funding various
aspects of the *EarlyPrint* project and in particular the Annotation
Module, which was built by [eXist Solutions
GmbH](http://www.existsolutions.com).

Work bearing on *EarlyPrint* has been generously supported by five grants from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and a Digital Extension grant from the American Council of Learned Societies.

<article class="pv4 bt bb b--black-10 ph3 ph0-l">
    <div class="flex flex-column flex-row-ns">
        <div class="w-100 pr3-ns order-2 order-1-ns">
            <div><a href="https://www.northwestern.edu/"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 200px;" src="/assets/img/Northwestern_purple_RGB.svg"></a><a href="https://www.wustl.edu/"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 350px; padding-left: 25px;" src="/assets/img/wustl.png"></a></div>
            <div><a href="https://mellon.org/grants/grants-database/grants/northwestern-university/11600668/"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 150px; padding-left: 15px;" src="/assets/img/Andrew_Mellon_Foundation_logo.svg"></a><a href="https://www.acls.org/ACLS-News/ACLS-News/Five-Humanities-Research-Projects-Receive-Digital"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 100px; padding-left: 75px;" src="/assets/img/acls.png"></a></div>
            <div style="padding-top: 10px;"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 150px; padding-left: 15px;" src="/assets/img/powered-by-TEI.png"><a href="http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/tcp-eebo/"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 150px; padding-left: 75px; padding-top: 10px;" src="/assets/img/eebotcp.png"></a></div>
            <div><a href="http://exist-db.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 150px; padding-left: 15px;" src="/assets/img/existdb.png"></a><a href="http://morphadorner.northwestern.edu/morphadorner/"><img style="vertical-align: top; width: 150px; padding-left: 75px; padding-top: 10px;" src="/assets/img/morphadornersmall.png"></a></div>
        </div>
    </div>
</article>

## Licenses

### Texts

All texts in the *EarlyPrint* Library corpus are covered by a [Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/legalcode) . See
the [short
summary](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/deed.en_US) of
how the license affects your use of the texts. If you are interested in
licensing the texts for commercial use, please contact Martin Mueller at
<martinmueller@northwestern.edu> .

### Software

The *EarlyPrint* Library site builds upon the TEI Simple PM software written by
Wolfgang Meier. That software, and the modifications made at
Northwestern University, are dual-licensed as follows.

1.  Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
    Unported License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/>

2.  <http://www.opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause>

All rights reserved. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms,
with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following
conditions are met:

-   Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
-   Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

This software is provided by the copyright holders and contributors \"as
is\" and any express or implied warranties, including, but not limited
to, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a
particular purpose are disclaimed. In no event shall the copyright
holder or contributors be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental,
special, exemplary, or consequential damages (including, but not limited
to, procurement of substitute goods or services; loss of use, data, or
profits; or business interruption) however caused and on any theory of
liability, whether in contract, strict liability, or tort (including
negligence or otherwise) arising in any way out of the use of this
software, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.

## Bugs and Known Limitations

The current release of the Library site has some bugs and weaknesses.

-   When generating a PDF or EPUB, you cannot exclude the
    machine-generated castlist or the list of corrections, nor can you
    extract particular acts or scenes.
-   When searching for a phrase by enclosing the search terms in quote
    marks, you may not find all the instances because the standard
    spelling may intrude between the words you specify. Select the
    proximity search type instead.
-   At present you cannot search for lemmata or parts of speech even
    though these are encoded in the texts.

We expect to correct these deficiences as time goes on.

Please report any other bugs you find to <editors@earlyprint.org>
