---
layout: post
title:  "How To Review Annotations"
date:   2019-09-14 10:00:00 -0500
tags: ep-library
categories: How-To
summary: An overview of reviewing new annotations on the Library site
---

### Annotations in Context

Selecting **Review** from the top-level menu brings you to a page
listing existing annotations in context. This view provides an
alternative to paging through a text to see which pages have suggested
corrections on them, and also allows annotators to keep track of the
status of their own suggestions. The list appears in the center of the
page, with a **Text Filter** form on the left, and an **Annotation
Filter** on the right. The **Text Filter** is identical to the one on
the **Browse** page, and you will find more about it how it works
[here](/how-to/browse_search_display.html).

The **Annotation Filter** allows you to filter which annotations are
displayed by **Status**, **Creator**, and **Modifier**:

![](/assets/img/annofilter.png)

The **Status** may be **Pending**, **Accepted**, **Rejected**, or
unselected (meaning any status). The **Creator** is the username of
whoever initiated the annotation, and the **Modifier** is whoever last
changed it, such as the editor who marked it as accepted or rejected. If
you would like to see the status of all of your own corrections, enter
your own username as the **Creator** and leave the **Status**
unselected. To see all unreviewed suggestions from a particular user,
enter **Pending** as the status and the corrector's username as the
**Creator**.

If there are selections in both the text filter and the annotation
filter, the filters are combined, but they may be cleared independently.
For example, if you select an individual text in the text filter and
**Pending** in the annotation filter, you will see only pending
annotations in the list. If you then clear the annotation filter, the
list will then show all annotations for the text regardless of their
status.
